```@meta
CurrentModule = RedBlackGraph
```

# RedBlackGraph.jl

Documentation for [RedBlackGraph](https://github.com/rappdw/RedBlackGraph.jl). RedBlackGraphs are
DAGs of interleaved Binary Trees. 

```@index
```

## Introduction 
When representing binary relationships, such as familial relationships, a number of approaches may be utilized 
including: ad-hoc, general graphs, specialized tables or charts. As I've explored different representations, a 
specialized mathematical representation has emerged. This mathematical representation is useful as the underpinnings 
of dynamic graph algorithms for use cases that include graph analysis, relationship calculation, loop detection, 
loop prevention, etc.

The underlying mathematical model is a directed, acyclic graph of multiple, interleaved binary trees, designated as a 
RedBlackGraph. The name, RedBlackGraph, derives from superficial similarity to Red Black Trees. Red Black Trees are 
binary trees such that each node has an extra, color bit (red or black). This color bit is used to balance the tree 
as modifications are made. In a RedBlackGraph each vertex also has an extra, color bit, rather than utilizing the 
color bit for balancing, the color bit is used to constrain edges between vertices.

I will provide a formal definition of a RedBlackGraph, as well as explore a number of interesting emergent properties. 
I will also examine several applications of RedBlackGraphs to illustrate the utility of using this mathematical model 
for familial relationships.

## Formal Definition
A RedBlackGraph is a network, ``\mathscr{N}``, consiting of a directed graph, ``G = (V,E)``, and a relationship 
function, ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})\rightarrow \{\mathbb{A}\}``. Where:

1. ``\mathbb{A}``, avos numbers, are: ``\mathbb{N} \cup \{0, {\color{red}1}\}`` ``\text{where: }\begin{cases} {\color{red}1} \lt 1, \\ {\color{red}1} \text{ is even}, \\ \text{otherwise  }{\color{red}1} \text{ behaves as }1 \end{cases}``
2. Any given vertex must have a color, either red or black
3. Any given vertex can have at most one outbound edge to a vertex of a given color
4. Every vertex has an edge to itself where: ``r(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{v})\rightarrow \begin{cases} {\color{red}1}, & \text{if }{\mathbf{v}} \text{ is a red vertex}, \\1, & \text{if }\mathbf{v}\text{ is a black vertex} \end{cases}``
5. If there is no path in ``G`` from ``\mathbf{u}`` to ``\mathbf{v}``, ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})\rightarrow 0``
6. For all other ``\mathbf{u}``, ``\mathbf{v}`` not covered by constraints 4 and 5, ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})\rightarrow x``, were ``x`` is generated by walking the shortest path (assume uniform edge weights) from ``\mathbf{u}`` to ``\mathbf{v}`` as follows:
    1. ``x \leftarrow 1``
    2. walk the edge along the shortest path and update ``x`` as follows: ``x \leftarrow \begin{cases} x \ll 0, & \text{if resultant vertex is red}, \\ x \ll 1, & \text{if resultant vertex is black} \end{cases}`` (``\ll`` is bitwise shift left)
    3. repeat step two until ``\mathbf{v}`` is reached

## Motivation

The relationships resulting from sexual reproduction can be modeled by a RedBlackGraph, arbitrarily assigning 
vertices that are male as Red and vertices that are female as Black with direction of edges being from the offspring 
to the parent. 

$(PlutoUI.LocalResource("img/simple-graph.png"))


## Observation
For a given vertex in a RedBlackGraph there are two distinct sub-graphs or "views" or perspectives, for a given vertex: Descendency and Ancestry. 

**Descendency** is the sub-graph for a given vertex that consists of all vertices and edges that can follow a graph traversal and arrive at the given node.

$(PlutoUI.LocalResource("img/simple-graph-descendency.png"))

**Ancestry** is the sub-graph for a given vertex that consists of all the vertices and edges reachable by following out-bound edges. This sub-graph is a well-formed binary tree. 

$(PlutoUI.LocalResource("img/simple-graph-ancestry.png"))

The Ancestry sub-graph from a given ``\mathbf{u}`` is a well-formed binary tree. ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})`` is defined as to number the nodes of the tree as they are encountered in a breadth first search. An concrete example of ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})`` is observed in a pedigree chart (common in family history research). See fig. Pedigree Chart. 

$(PlutoUI.LocalResource("img/pedigree-1.png"))

## Adjacency Matrix

An adjacency matrix is a square matrix used to represent a graph. The elements of the matrix are 1 (or edge weight) if there is an edge between the vertices represented by the column index and the row index. Slightly more formally, for ``G`` with a vertex set ``V``, the adjacency matrix is a square ``|V|`` x ``|V|`` matrix, ``A`` such that ``A_{ij}`` is ``1`` if there exists an edge from ``\mathbf{i}`` to ``\mathbf{j}`` and ``0`` otherwise.

Given the above example graph and chosing indices for the vertices as follows: 0 - Female Offspring, 1 - Male Offspring, 2 - Male Progenitor, 3 - Female Progenitor, the graph would be represented by the following adjacency matrix.

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}
0 & 0 & 1 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & 1 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
\end{bmatrix}$$

## RedBlackGraph Adjacency Matrix

Let's define the adjacency matrix for a RedBlackGraph only slightly differently. ``R_{ij}=r(\mathbf{i}, \mathbf{j})`` if there is an relationship from ``\mathbf{i}`` to ``\mathbf{j}`` and ``0`` otherwise. The following is the RedBlackGraph adjacency matrix for the above example graph.

$$R = \begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 & 2 & 3 \\
0 & {\color{red}1} & 2 & 3 \\
0 & 0 & {\color{red}1} & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
\end{bmatrix}$$

Observe the following properties:

``trace(R) = |V_{black}| - |V_{red}|``

``|V| = |V_{black}| + |V_{red}|``

``|V_{black}| = \frac{|V| + trace(R)}{2}``

``|V_{red}| = \frac{|V| - trace(R)}{2}``

## Transitive Closure

Computing the transitive closure of an adjacency matrix, ``A``, results in the reachability a matrix, ``A^+``, that shows all vertices that are reachable from any given vertex. If ``A_{ij} == 1`` there is a path from ``\mathbf{v}_i`` to ``\mathbf{v}_j``.

The transitive closure of a RedBlackGraph adjacency matrix, ``R``, is defined to be the relationship matrix, ``R^+``. In addition to reachability, ``R^+`` is defined in such that if ``R^+_{ij} == \mathbf{n}`` and ``\mathbf{n}`` is non-zero, then from ``\mathbf{n}`` we can derive both the path lengh and the explicit traversal path from ``\mathbf{i}`` to ``\mathbf{j}``.

As an example consider the following graph, where each node has been labeled with a vertex index:

$(PlutoUI.LocalResource("img/simple-graph-transitive-closure.png"))

By inspection:

$$R = \begin{bmatrix}
{\color{red}1} & 2 & 3 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & {\color{red}1} & 0 & 2 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & {\color{red}1} & 0 \\
2 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
\end{bmatrix}\text{ and }R^+ = \begin{bmatrix}
{\color{red}1} & 2 & 3 & 4 & 0 \\
0 & {\color{red}1} & 0 & 2 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & {\color{red}1} & 0 \\
2 & 4 & 5 & 8 & 1 \\
\end{bmatrix}$$

Before examining how to generate ``R^+`` from ``R``, consider the following observations:

* ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})`` is even when ``\mathbf{v}`` is red and odd when black. (By convention ``{\color{red}1}`` is considered even.)
* The path length is inherent in ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})``, and is trivially derived by taking the integral portion of ``log_{2}(r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}))``.
* The traversal path is also inherent in ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})`` and can be derived by reversing ``r``'s defintion and successively right shifting out bits (of a ``base_2`` integer representation) and using that bit to "walk" the traversal edge to a red vertex or black vertex.
* The diameter of ``R^+`` is given by ``log_{2}(max(r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})))``.

## RedBlack Arithmetic

As constructing ``R^+`` by inspection is cumbersome for non-trivial cases, let's explore a method to algorithmically derive ``R^+`` from ``R``. 

### Transitive Relationship Function or Avos Product

The first step requires defining a transitive relationship function. To illustrate,  consider 3 vertices: ``\mathbf{u}``, ``\mathbf{v}`` and ``\mathbf{w}``. Further, assume that there is a path from ``\mathbf{u}`` to ``\mathbf{v}`` and from ``\mathbf{v}`` to ``\mathbf{w}``. I'll define the function, ``f(r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}),r(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w}))\rightarrow r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{w})``, as the *avos product* and designate it using ``⨰``, e.g. ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{w})=r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}) ⨰ r(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w})``.

If ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})=4`` (``\mathbf{v}`` is ``\mathbf{u}``'s paternal grandfather) and ``r(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w})=7`` (``\mathbf{w}`` is ``\mathbf{v}``'s maternal grandmother). Using either the defintion of ``r`` or transcribing ``\mathbf{v}``'s pedigree into the proper place in ``\mathbf{u}``'s pedigree chart we see that ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{w})=19``, or ``19 = 4 ⨰ 7``. To further explore this consider the following (``r(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y})`` represented in base-2 for illustrative purposes):

| ``\mathbf{v}``'s relationship to ``\mathbf{u}``  | ``\mathbf{w}``'s relationship to ``\mathbf{v}`` | ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})`` | ``r(\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w})`` | ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{w})`` |
| ---------------------- | --------------------- | --------- | -------- | --------- |
| father                 | father                | 10        | 10       | 100       |
| father                 | mother                | 10        | 11       | 101       |
| mother                 | father                | 11        | 10       | 110       |
| mother                 | mother                | 11        | 11       | 111       |
| father                 | paternal grandfather  | 10        | 100      | 1000      |
| maternal grandmother   | paternal grandfather  | 111       | 100      | 11100     |

To complete the definiton of the Avos Product, the following conventions are imposed:
1. ``{\color{red}1} = {\color{red}1} ⨰ 1``
2. ``{\color{red}1} = 1 ⨰ {\color{red}1}``
3. For all other cases, ``{\color{red}1}`` is treated as ``1``

### Avos Sum

It is natural to pair multiplication with addition for linear algebra operations (matrix multiplication, matrix distance product, etc.) a min-avos product pairing conforms to the definition of RedBlackGraphs with a slight modification required for implementation in a typical RAM computer, namely ``{\color{red}1}=2^\mathbf{w}-1``, where ``\mathbf{w}`` is the word size of the numeric type. Aside from ``{\color{red}1}``, the range of ``r(\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v})`` is ``\mathbb{N}``. It is therefore, natural to utilize unsigned numeric types to represent avos numbers. Additionally, assume the convention ``min(0)=\infty``. The min function needs to be aware of both these conventions. These conventions define ``avos sum`` which is designated by ``\dotplus``, e.g. ``{\color{red}1} = {\color{red}1} \dotplus 5`` and ``2 = 37 \dotplus 2`` and ``3 = 0 \dotplus 3``.

To complete the definiton of the Avos Sum, the following conventions are imposed:
1. ``{\color{red}1} = {\color{red}1} \dotplus 1``
2. ``{\color{red}1} = 1 \dotplus {\color{red}1}``
3. For all other cases, ``{\color{red}1}`` is treated as ``1``

## Documentation

```@autodocs
Modules = [RedBlackGraph]
```
